Pop culture is rife with Niko Bellics. From Ethan Edwards in The Searchers to Travis Pickle in Taxi Driver and also down to John Rambo in First Blood, the archetype of a war veteran who comes back home unable to quiet the war raging inside of him is a classic trope. 

In this case, Niko Bellic doesn't comes back home, he is thrown into a world he doesn't understand. Others call it freedom, but he only sees his cousin idilical life lies, bad weather, police chases, roads filled with cars, road tolls, many people who tell him what to do and a closed fair. Think about this, why creating a fair with a rollercoster and a ferris wheel, when it's going to be closed. Yes, American dream, freedom, Liberty City, all was a bad joke. In this game Rockstar achieved providing a top-notch technical game with an idea very well integrated in it, an idea maybe not everyone will like: America is a lie, freedom is a lie.

The Journey radio station, captures the vibe of the game in a way no other station does. One of the various phrases this station says is this: "The eternal constant of life is that you are fucked", it may be a little bit direct but, yes in this game Niko is always fucked, in very few times you see him happy. The song which most captures the essence of the game is: <i>Pruit Igoe</i> by Philip Glass, it's just pure GTA 4 alienation.

A lot of people complain about the monotonous missions Rockstar normally provides in his games, always the same structure, go from point A to point B, kill some people and repeat. It's true that this game doesn't have a lot of gameplay variety, but when they have created a deep, complex world it's normal that they want the player to dive into it and feel a part of it. In this complex technical masterpieces filled with details the developers want the player to experiment it and feel a part of it.

They also manage to create missions which use original concepts to alter the gameplay. Like when in <i>I'll take her</i> mission, you are kidnapping Grace and when you are driving her to the place she will be kept hidden she tries to escape and moves the steering wheel making your driving worse. This little mission was one of my favorites because of this simple concept that made it feel apart of the others.

In <i>Buoys Ahoy</i> mission, Niko goes with Bernie to just have fun in a boat, Russian mob intercepts them and they fight. In this context Bernie says this: "Why does everything that's meant to be fun have to be so miserable?", this quote is a good summary of what this game is. 

In the little details and moments with the friends they tell a lot, Dwayne telling Niko that all is the same, being out of jail or inside of it, life doesn't changes. Or that short humanity parts when Packie tell Niko how his brothers were fighting and they stop when they saw Katie hidden, crying and shaking, this hardcore moments that they throw you as nothing they grow into you. Everytime I hanged out with Niko's friends they told me something different, they have such a variety of dialogues, it's awesome.

In the end (my end) Niko Bellic is close to be happy and get away of the criminal life he has farmed, but when all appeared to be right, it ended being miserable, the italian mob kill Gracie. A tragedy, when they were just starting to try to reconduct their lives. Niko was going to go away of his criminal lifestyle and Gracie was going to trust him. When in the end Niko kills Jimmy Peggorino nothing changes, as Dwayne said Niko, all is the same, no mather what happens. Roman tries to think they achieved something, but in the end the city still exists, this characters were just creations of the city, another Jimmy Peggorino will rise and all was for nothing, only for pain and missery. When I first heard Niko saying that he liked Grace I just hoped they could be together, but in Liberty City there aren't happy endings, only brutal ones. As Bernie told Niko, "Why does everything that's meant to be fun have to be so miserable?" the American Dream constant of immigrants seeing their hopes broken by reality.